Assignments 
#############

Assignment 1
****************

.. admonition:: Instructions

    Answer all questions!

    This assignment is due at 2.00pm on Thursday, 28 August. It is worth 10% of your final mark for
    this course. Hand in your work by putting it in the EMET2008/6008 assignment box (HW Arndt
    Building 25a, opposite of room 1002). Absolutely no extensions will be given, late assignments
    will receive zero credit. If you have a university approved excuse for not handing in this
    assignment, then your marks for your final exam will be weighted up by 10% to compensate for the
    missed work.  
   
    While I would prefer it if you could provide *typed* answers, you may also hand in written
    answers as long as they are legible and easy to follow. (I will not only mark the correctness of
    your answers but also the clarity of the exposition and the transparency with which you
    communicate your results.) The work that you hand in should consist of answers to the questions,
    together with an appendix which contains both the printout of a complete Stata do-file and a
    log-file (prodced by the do-file) that covers the entire assignment.
    
    Answers should be in sentence form (i.e. single word or single number answers without
    explanation will be considered incomplete), but clarity of presentation is important, so try to
    make your comments/discussion brief and to the point. Annotated output does not constitute a
    sufficient answer to any question, but you should highlight those parts of your output that you
    explicitly use in your answers.

    If you have any questions regarding to these instructions, do not hesitate to ask me (either
    during class meetings or consultation times or e-mail.)

Exercise 1 
============= 

Frankel and Rose (for short: FR), in their 2005 paper ''*Is Trade Good or Bad for the Environment?
Sorting Out the Causality.*'' which is published in *The Review of Economics and Statistics* (volume
87(1), pages 85-91) empirically address the question::

    Is globalization good or bad for the environment?

In particular, they examine whether countries which are more open to international trade incur more
(or less) environmental damage as result, controlling for international variations in real growth
rates and in political institutions. FR quantify environmental damage on seven dimensions:
:math:`\text{SO}_2` air concentrations, :math:`\text{NO}_2` air concentrations, particulate matter
air concentrations, :math:`\text{CO}_2` air concentrations, deforestation, energy resources
depletion, and rural clean water access.  Their analytic focus is primarily on the
:math:`\text{SO}_2`, :math:`\text{NO}_2`, and particulate matter air pollution impacts, however. 

Overall, FR find that greater trade openness, quantified as 

.. math::
   \frac{\text{Exports} + \text{Imports}}{\text{GDP}}, 
   
is actually associated with better environmental outcomes. This result might seem surprising, in
view of the::

    ''...race-to-the-bottom hypothesis, which says that open countries in general adopt looser
    standards of environmental regulation, out of fear of a loss in international competitiveness.
    Alternatively, poor open countries may act as pollution havens, adopting lax environmental
    standards to attract multinational corporations and export pollution-intensive goods.  
    
    Less widely recognized is the possibility of an effect in the opposite direction, which we call
    the gains-from-trade hypothesis. If trade raises income, it allows countries to attain more of
    what they want, which includes environmental as well as more conventional output. Openness could
    have a positive effect on environmental quality (even for a given level of GDP per capita) for a
    number of reasons. First, trade can spur managerial and technological innovation, which can have
    positive effects on both the economy and the environment. Second, multinational corporations
    tend to bring clean state-of-the-art production techniques from high-standard source countries
    of origin to host countries. Third is the international ratcheting up of environmental standards
    through heightened public awareness. Whereas some environmental gains may tend to occur with any
    increase in income, whether taking place in an open economy or not, others may be more likely
    when associated with international trade and investment. Whether the race-to-the-bottom effect
    in practice dominates the gains-from-trade effect is an empirical question.''
    (modified quotation from FR 2005)


In this exercise you will replicate FR's empirical results for the :math:`\text{SO}_2` measure of air
pollution and diagnostically check their regression model, so as to assess the credibility of their
statistical inference results.

Two features of this exercise should be noted at the outset. First, it is worth noting that the FR
model is estimated using only 41 sample observations. This is an unusually small sample size for a
piece of research in applied econometrics that is published in such a high-quality journal. As we
have learned in class, sample estimators will have an approximate normal distribution (justified by
the central limit theorem) -- the larger the sample size, the better the approximation. For the
purpose of this assignment, we will not worry further about the small sample size here. We keep it
in the back of our minds but are otherwise happy to use and apply our standard econometric toolkit.

Second, we conduct our analysis here under the assumption that all key explanatory variables are
*exogenous*. In particular, real per capita income and trade openness are considered to be
determined outside of the model. (We will deviate from that assumption in the next exercise.)

a)  Use the Stata file *Frankel_Rose.dta* (available for download on Wattle). This file contains
    data on 41 countries, collecting (among others) the following variables:

        * ``sulfdm``: mean 1990 :math:`\text{SO}_2` concentration (in micrograms per cubic meter).
        * ``inc``: logarithm of real per capita GDP 
          (from the Penn World Tables 5.6; in 1990 dollars, PPP adjusted)
        * ``incsqr``: squared value of the logarithm of real per capita GDP.
        * ``pwtopen``: :math:`100 \cdot` (Imports + Exports)/GDP from the Penn World Tables 5.6.
        * ``polity``: index of democratic (+10) versus autocratic (-10) institutions.
        * ``lareapc``: logarithm of land area per capita.
        * ``oecd``: dummy variable which equals 1 if country is an OECD member country
        * ``country``: country name


    Produce some basic descriptive statistics of the data. Use basic graphical tools to study the
    relationship between trade openness and environmental outcomes. Are these descriptive findings
    indicative of a positive or a negative association?

#)  Estimate a basic regression model with ``sulfdm`` as the outcome variable using the regressors
    ``inc``, ``incsqr``, ``pwtopen``, ``polity``, ``lareapc``. Interpret your coefficient estimates.
    
    Test the model for heteroskedasticity. Do you conclude that the model is heteroskedastic? (If
    so, proceed with the heteroskedasticity-corrected version of the model in everything that
    follows.)

    In the linear regression model, when you correct for heteroskedasticity, how do your coefficient
    estimates change (vis-a-vis the model in which you do not correct for homoskedasticity)? What
    about the standard errors?
    
#)  Explain (in words, not maths) what the :math:`R^2` of a regression measures. How does the
    *adjusted* :math:`R^2`, denoted :math:`\bar{R}^2`, differ from this?
    
    Using the adjusted :math:`R^2` statistic, what is the fraction of the sample variation in per
    capita real output which is *explained* by these five explanatory variables? By how much does
    this fraction decrease once the openness variable is dropped from the model? (Note: To have
    Stata report the value of adjusted :math:`R^2`, use the command *ereturn list* after the regress
    command: adjusted :math:`R^2` will be listed as ``e(r2_a)``.)

#)  At what p-value can you reject the null hypothesis that the coefficient on the openness variable
    is zero? At what significance level can this null hypothesis be rejected? Which is more
    appropriate, the one-tailed test or the two-tailed test? What is the estimated 95% confidence
    interval for this coefficient? Does it include the value zero? What does this say about the
    impact of trade openness on :math:`\text{SO}_2` concentrations -- i.e., on the relative
    importance of the ''race-to-the- bottom'' versus ''gains-from-trade'' hypotheses alluded to earlier?

#)  Examine a histogram of the fitted errors for the estimated model. (Have Stata separate the
    fitted errors into ten categories -- the ``bin(10)`` option in Stata â€“ but also feel free to
    experiment with other choices.) Does this histogram suggest that distribution of the model
    errors is substantially non-normal? In particular, are there any obvious outliers?

#)  Produce the scatter plot of ``sulfdm`` against the crucial independent variable ``pwtopen``. Can
    you spot two outliers? Which countries do they correspond to? 
    
    Do you think that the apparent negative relationship between ``sufdm`` and ``pwtopen`` might be
    largely driven by these two observations? To formally check this, create two dummy variables for
    these two countries and add them to the regression. Does this change your findings for the
    significance of the openness variable?
    
    Now, make four histograms: for ``sulfdm`` and ``pwtopen`` as well as for their logarithms.  Then
    make a scatter plot of ``logsulfdm`` versus ``logpwtopen``. What re-specification of the FR
    model do these results suggest? Is there any longer a need to worry about the two outliers from
    before?  

#)  Estimate the re-specified model, using both the logs of ``sulfdm`` and ``pwtopen``. (Recall from
    your study of the log-log model in EMET2007 that the coefficient on ``logpwtopen`` can be
    interpreted as the elasticity of ``sulfdm`` with respect to ``pwtopen``.) What do you conclude
    about the openness effect? (Make sure to check again for the presence of homoskedasticity versus
    heteroskedasticity.)
    
#)  Check whether the key coefficient in the model is different for OECD countries.

(*Note: This exercise is from the book ''Fundamentals of Applied Econometrics'' by Richard Ashley.*)

Exercise 2
===============

In Exercise 1 you used OLS to study the relationship between trade openness and sulfur dioxide
levels (as a proxy for environmental outcomes). That analysis was done under the assumption that all
explanatory variables are exogenous. The actual contribution of the paper by FR is to look deeper
and examine the *causal* relationship between trade openness and environmental quality while both
controlling for income and appropriately dealing with the likely endogeneity of both income and
trade openness. To that end they used several instrumental variables to deal with these two
explanatory variables. You will replicate some of these results in the current exercise.

a)  Use the Stata file *Frankel_Rose.dta*. This file contains data on 41 countries, collecting (in
    addition to the variables mentioned in the previous exercise) the following instrumental
    variables:

        * ``trade_potential``: instrument for ``pwtopen`` 

          Trade potential of a country. This variable combines information on a country's
          geographical location (number of neighbor countries, access to sea, landlock status),
          population size, land area and language to construct a measure of potential trade. For
          example, all else equal, a country with access to the sea will have a higher trade
          potential than a country that is landlocked. This IV is notably correlated with the
          endogenous regressor ``pwtopen`` while plausibly uncorrelated with environmental outcomes.

        * ``inc_exog``: instrument for ``inc``

          Exogenous income of a country. While per capita income ``inc`` is likely endogenous, it
          contains some exogenous components. FR combine information on a country's lagged income as
          well as school attainment to construct the exogenous component of income. For example, all
          else equal, a country with higher average school attainment will have higher per capita
          income than a country with lower average school attainment. This IV is notably correlated
          with the endogenous regressor ``inc`` while plausibly uncorrelated with environmental
          outcomes.

        * ``inc_exogsqr``: instrument for ``incsqr`` 

          Since their model specification also includes the square of the logarithm of real per
          capita GDP (``incsqr``), FR also define ``inc_exogsq`` as the square of ``inc_exog`` and
          use this as an instrument for ``incsqr``.

    Re-estimate the basic model from Exercise 1) part b) using instrumental variables estimation
    instead. Use all three instruments and make your estimation robust to heteroskedasticity.

#)  At what p-value can you reject the null hypothesis that the coefficient on the openness variable
    is zero? At what significance level can this null hypothesis be rejected? Which is more
    appropriate, the one-tailed test or the two-tailed test? What is the estimated 95% confidence
    interval for this coefficient? Does it include the value zero? What does this say about the
    impact of trade openness on :math:`\text{SO}_2` concentrations -- i.e., on the relative
    importance of the ''race-to-the- bottom'' versus ''gains-from-trade'' hypotheses alluded to earlier?

#)  Re-estimate the model, this time examining the three first-stage regression models. Do all three
    first-stage models have reasonably high adjusted :math:`R^2` values? Do you need to be concerned
    about *weak instruments*? (Use the 'Rule of Thumb' explained in the textbook, section 12.3.)

#)  Using the insights gained from Exercise 1, re-estimate the model, replacing ``sulfdm`` and
    ``pwtopen`` by their logarithms, ``logsulfdm`` and ``logpwtopen``.  Produce a histogram of
    ``trade_potential`` and of its logarithm, ``logtrade_potential``. Which one appears to be closer
    to a normal distribution? Which one should you use for 2SLS estimation? Provide the estimation
    results. 
    
#)  Test whether the OLS and 2SLS estimates of the coefficient on ``logpwtopen`` are significantly
    different. (Hint: use the Hausman test; in Stata type ``help: hausman`` to learn how to use it.
    Provide a brief explanation of what the Hausman test does.)

#)  In conclusion to Exercises 1 and 2, what is your answer to the question *Is globalization good
    or bad for the environment*? What are the strengths and weaknesses of the econometric analysis
    conducted here? Do you see any possible extensions that could help improve your research?

(*Note: This exercise is from the book ''Fundamentals of Applied Econometrics'' by Richard Ashley.*)

Exercise 3
=============

In the research paper ''Does Size Matter in Australia'', published in *The Economic Record* (Vol.
86, No. 272, March 2010, pp.71-83), Michael Kortt and Andrew Leigh address the research question::

    Do taller and slimmer workers earn more?

To that effect, they consider the following linear model:

.. math::
   W_i = \beta_0 + \beta_1 \text{Height}_i + \beta_2 \text{BMI}_i + \beta_3 X_{i3} + \cdots +
   \beta_k X_{ik} + u_i.

(This equation is my version of equation (1) on page 73 of their paper.) Here, :math:`W_i` is the
log hourly wage of person :math:`i`, :math:`\text{Height}_i` represents a person's height and
:math:`\text{BMI}_i` stands for a person's body mass index. The remaining regressors, :math:`X_{i3},
\ldots, X_{ik}` capture a person's demographic characteristics, including gender, age (linear and
quadratic) and education.

Obtain a copy of the paper (available online for ANU students and faculty) and answer the following
questions.

a)  Kortt and Leigh begin the analysis by estimating all coefficients by OLS. Summarize their OLS
    results regarding the two main coefficients of interest, :math:`\beta_1` and :math:`\beta_2`
    (for height and BMI). 

#)  Would you interpret these estimates as *causal*? What are the main endogeneity problems in this
    regression?

#)  Explain how Kortt and Leigh attempt to address the endogeneity problem using instrumental
    variables. How do their findings change?

#)  What is the main conclusion of the paper? Do taller and slimmer workers in Australia earn more?
    What is the evidence from other countries?


